Introduction vignette (#5159)
tidyverse/ggplot2: vignettes/ggplot2.Rmd

```{r cake, echo = FALSE}
#| fig.alt = "Scatterplot of city versus highway miles per gallon, for 234 cars
#|  coloured by engine displacement. The plot has six panels in a 2-row, 
#|  3-column layout, showing the combinations of three types of drive train and
#|  year of manifacture. Every panel has an individual trendline."
library(ggplot2)
ggplot(mpg, aes(cty, hwy)) +
  geom_point(aes(colour = displ)) +
  geom_smooth(formula = y ~ x, method = "lm") +
  scale_colour_viridis_c() +
  facet_grid(year ~ drv) +
  coord_fixed() +
  theme_minimal() +
  theme(panel.grid.minor = element_blank())
```

For structure, we go over the 7 composable parts that come together as a set of instructions on how to draw a chart.

```{r overview_graphic, echo=FALSE}
#| fig.alt = "A schematic displaying seven overlaying rhombuses indicating the
#|  different composable parts. From bottom to top, the labels read 'Data', 
#|  'Mapping', 'Layers', 'Scales', 'Facets', 'Coordinates' and 'Theme'."

> library(ggplot2)

Author: Thanks for catching this.

               "Facets", "Coordinates", "Theme")
  ) +
  scale_fill_manual(
    values = c("#E69F00", "#56B4E9", "#009E73", "#F0E442",
               "#0072B2", "#D55E00", "#CC79A7"),
    guide = "none"
  ) +
  theme_void() +
  theme(axis.text.y = element_text(face = "bold", hjust = 1))

```

Out of these components, ggplot2 needs at least the following three to produce a chart: data, a mapping and a layer. The scales, facets, coordinates and theme have sensible defaults that take away a lot of finicky work.

## Data

As the foundation of every graphic, ggplot2 uses [data](https://ggplot2-book.org/getting-started.html#fuel-economy-data) to construct a plot. 
The system works best if the data is provided in a [tidy](https://tidyr.tidyverse.org/articles/tidy-data.html) format, which briefly means a rectangular data frame structure where rows are observations and columns are variables.

As the first step in many plots, you would pass the data to the `ggplot()` function, which stores the data to be used later by other parts of the plotting system. For example, if we intend to make a graphic about the `mpg` dataset, we would start as follows:

> ```{r example_data, fig.show='hide'}

Author: This is on purpose because the figure is hidden.

```

## Layers

The heart of any graphic is the [layers](https://ggplot2-book.org/toolbox.html). They take the mapped data and display it in something humans can understand as a representation of the data. 
Every layer consists of three important parts:

1. The [**geometry**](https://ggplot2-book.org/individual-geoms.html) that determines *how* data are displayed, such as points, lines or rectangles.
1. The [**statistical transformation**](https://ggplot2-book.org/statistical-summaries.html) that may compute new variables from the data and affect *what* of the data is displayed.
1. The [**position adjustment**](https://ggplot2-book.org/layers.html#position) that primarily determines *where* a piece of data is being displayed.

A layer can be constructed using the `geom_*()` and `stat_*()` functions. These functions often determine one of the three parts of a layer, while the other two can still be specified. Here is how we can use two layers to display the `cty` and `hwy` columns of the `mpg` dataset as points and stack a trend line on top.

```{r example_layer, fig.show='hold'}
#| fig.alt = "A scatterplot showing city versus highway miles per gallon for 

> #|  234 cars. The plot has a blue trendline with a positive slope."

Author: Yes, good point.

#| fig.alt = "Scatterplot of city versus highway miles per gallon, for 234 cars.
#|  The plot has six panels in a 2-row, 3-column layout, showing the 
#|  combinations of three types of drive train and year of manifacture."
ggplot(mpg, aes(cty, hwy)) +
  geom_point() +
  facet_grid(year ~ drv)
```

## Coordinates

You can view the [coordinates](https://ggplot2-book.org/coord.html) part of the plot as an interpreter of position aesthetics. 
While typically Cartesian coordinates are used, the coordinate system powers the display of [map](https://ggplot2-book.org/maps.html) projections and [polar](https://ggplot2-book.org/coord.html#polar-coordinates-with-coord_polar) plots.

We can also use coordinates to display a plot with a fixed aspect ratio, so that one unit has the same length in both the x and y direction. The `coord_fixed()` function sets this ratio automatically.

```{r example_coords}
#| fig.alt = "A scatterplot showing city versus highway miles per gallon for 
#|  234 cars. The aspect ratio of the plot is such that units on the x-axis
#|  have the same length as units on the y-axis."
ggplot(mpg, aes(cty, hwy)) +
  geom_point() +
  coord_fixed()
```

## Theme

> The [theme](https://ggplot2-book.org/polishing.html) system controls almost any visuals of the plot that are not controlled by the data and is therefore important for the look and feel of the plot. You can use the theme for alterations ranging from determining the location of the legends to setting the horizontal text adjustment for the bottom x-axis specifically. Many elements in the theme are hierarchical in that setting the look of the general axis line affects those of the bottom and left axes simultaneously.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [theme](https://ggplot2-book.org/polishing.html) system controls almost any visuals of the plot that are not controlled by the data and is therefore important for the look and feel of the plot. You can use the theme for customizations ranging from changing the location of the legends to setting the background color of the plot. Many elements in the theme are hierarchical in that setting the look of the general axis line affects those of the x and y axes simultaneously.
```

Reviewer: Changed the example to make it more accessible to someone who hasn't made ggplots before.

> To tweak the visuals of the plot, one can use many of the built-in `theme_*()` functions and/or detail specific aspects with the `theme()` function. The `element_*()` functions control the graphical attributes of theme parts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To tweak the look of the plot, one can use many of the built-in `theme_*()` functions and/or detail specific aspects with the `theme()` function. The `element_*()` functions control the graphical attributes of theme components.
```

```{r example_theme}
#| fig.alt = "A scatterplot showing city versus highway miles per gallon for 
#|  234 cars. The points are coloured according to seven classes of cars. The
#|  legend of the colour is displayed on top of the plot. The plot has thick
#|  axis lines and the bottom axis line is blue."
ggplot(mpg, aes(cty, hwy, colour = class)) +
  geom_point() +
  theme_minimal() +
  theme(
    legend.position = "top",
    axis.line = element_line(linewidth = 0.75),
    axis.line.x.bottom = element_line(colour = "blue")
  )
```

## Combining

> As mentioned at the start, you can combine all the parts of the grammar of graphics to build a customised plot of your data. The plot showed at the beginning is a combination of the parts illustrated above:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned at the start, you can layer all of the pieces to build a customized plot of your data, like the one shown at the beginning of this vignette:
```
